ambient: add traffic routing docs (#12781)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/ambient/architecture/index.md

## Traffic routing

In ambient mode, workloads can fall into 3 categories:

> * Uncaptured: this is a standard pod without any mesh features enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Uncaptured: this is a standard pod without any mesh features enabled.
```

> * Captured: this is a pod that has traffic intercepted by `ztunnel`. Pods can be captured by setting the `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient` label on a namespace.

Reviewer: I assume there will be some intro material that describes the architectural components, but I wonder if it might be worth adding some glossary entries and reference them in the first use in this doc, to make it more easy to read alone?
```suggestion
* Captured: this is a pod that has traffic intercepted by {{< gloss >}}ztunnel{{< /gloss >}}. Pods can be captured by setting the `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient` label on a namespace.
```

Author: Yes this is intended to be the deep dive. Writing the docs in reverse order, but users will see this last. Agree on glossary

> * Captured: this is a pod that has traffic intercepted by `ztunnel`. Pods can be captured by setting the `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient` label on a namespace.

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention the redirection annotation on the pod here @howardjohn ?

> * Waypoint enabled: this is a pod that is "Captured" *and* has a waypoint proxy deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Waypoint enabled: this is a pod that is "Captured" *and* has a {{< gloss >}}waypoint proxy{{< /gloss >}} deployed.
```

Reviewer 3: Noting the next line just uses waypoint, would it be better to have the single word in the glossary?

  A waypoint will, by default, apply to all pods in the same namespace.

>   It can optionally be set to apply to only a specific namespace with the `istio.io/for-service-account` annotation on the `Gateway`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  It can optionally be set to apply to only a specific service account with the `istio.io/for-service-account` annotation on the `Gateway`.
```

  If there is both a namespace waypoint and service account waypoint, the service account waypoint takes precedence.

Depending on which category a workload is in, the request path will be different.

### Ztunnel routing

#### Outbound

When a captured pod makes an outbound request, it will be transparently redirected to `ztunnel` which will determine where and how to forward the request.

> In general, the traffic routing behaves just like Kubernetes default traffic routing.
> Requests to a `Service` will be sent to an endpoint within the `Service`, and requests directly to a `Pod` IP would be go directly to that `Pod` IP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, the traffic routing behaves just like Kubernetes default traffic routing;
requests to a `Service` will be sent to an endpoint within the `Service` while requests to a `Pod` IP will go directly to that IP.
```

However, depending on the destination's capabilities, different behavior will occur.
If the destination is also captured, or otherwise has Istio proxy capabilities (such as a sidecar), the request will be upgraded to an encrypted HBONE tunnel.
If the destination has a waypoint proxy, in addition to being upgraded to HBONE, the request will instead be forwarded to that waypoint.

> Note that in the case of a request to a `Service`, a specific endpoint will be selected to determine if it has a waypoint.

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to explain how the specific endpoint would be selected?  Is it randomly?

Author: That is an implementation detail - currently its random but we will optimize it in the future. I don't mind putting it but it will change

Reviewer 2: I see, ok, SGTM not documenting it for now.

However, if it *has* a waypoint, the request will be sent with a target destination of the `Service`, not the selected endpoint.
This allows the waypoint to apply service-oriented policies to the traffic.

> In the rare case that a `Service` has a mix of waypoint enabled and non-enabled endpoints, this would mean that some of our requests would be sent to a waypoint while others would not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the rare case that a `Service` has a mix of waypoint enabled and non-enabled endpoints, some requests would be sent to a waypoint while other requests to the same service would not.
```

#### Inbound

When a captured pod receives an inbound request, it will be transparently redirected to `ztunnel`.
When `ztunnel` receives the request, it will apply Authorization Policies and forward the request only if the request meets the policies.

A pod can receive HBONE traffic or plaintext traffic.
By default, both will be accepted by `ztunnel`.

> Because plaintext request will have no peer identity when Authorization Policies are evaluated,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because plaintext requests will have no peer identity when Authorization Policies are evaluated,
```

> However, when evaluating Authorization Policies for plaintext traffic, the peer identity would be unset.

Reviewer: This seems unclear: `peer identity would be unset`? Is it "not set" or does it get unset?

Author: Yeah wasn't sure how to word this.. what I mean is if its plaintext, there is no peer identity. So any policy matching on an identity would fail. So to deny plaintext, youcan make a policy that only allows some identity

> However, when evaluating Authorization Policies for plaintext traffic, the peer identity would be unset.
> This allows a user to set a policy requiring an identity (either *any* identity, or a specific one) to block all plaintext traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although plaintext request will have no peer identity when Authorization Policies are evaluated,
a user can set a policy requiring an identity (either *any* identity, or a specific one) to block all plaintext traffic.
```

> When the destination is waypoint enabled, all requests *must* go through the waypoint, where policy is enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the destination is waypoint enabled, all requests *must* go through the waypoint where policy is enforced.
```

> The `ztunnel` will enforce this occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ztunnel` will make sure this occurs.
```

> However, there is an edge case: a well behaving HBONE client (such as another ztunnel or Istio sidecar) would know to send to the waypoint, but for other clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there is an edge case: a well behaving HBONE client (such as another `ztunnel` or Istio sidecar) would know to send to the waypoint, but other clients
```

(such as a workload outside of the mesh) likely would not know anything about waypoint proxies and send requests directly.

> When these direct calls are made, the ztunnel will "hairpin" the request to its own waypoint to ensure policies are properly enforced.

Reviewer: What exactly does "hairpin" mean? "Capture and redirect"?

### Waypoint routing

A waypoint exclusively receives HBONE requests.
Upon receiving a request, the waypoint will ensure it is targeting either a `Pod` that it manages or a `Service` that contains a `Pod` it manages.

For either type of request, the waypoint will enforce policies (such as `AuthorizationPolicy`, `WasmPlugin`, `Telemetry`, etc) before forwarding.

> For requests to `Pod`s directly, these are simply forwarded directly after policy is applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For direct requests to `Pod`s, these are simply forwarded directly after policy is applied.
```

> For requests to `Service`s, the waypoint will apply routing and load balancing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For requests to `Service`s, the waypoint will also apply routing and load balancing.
```

> By default, a `Service` will simply route to itself, load balancing across its endpoints.

Author: Yes

> By default, a `Service` will simply route to itself, load balancing across its endpoints.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, makes sense.

This can be overridden with Routes for that `Service`.

> For example, the below policy would ensure requests to `echo` were actually forwarded to `echo-v1`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the below policy will ensure that requests to the `echo` service are forwarded to `echo-v1`:
```
